There are two distinct ways to be politically moderate: on purpose and by
accident. Intentional moderates are trimmers, deliberately choosing a position
mid-way between the extremes of right and left. Accidental moderates end up in
the middle, on average, because they make up their own minds about each
question, and the far right and far left are roughly equally wrong.

You can distinguish intentional from accidental moderates by the distribution
of their opinions. If the far left opinion on some matter is 0 and the far
right opinion 100, an intentional moderate's opinion on every question will be
near 50. Whereas an accidental moderate's opinions will be scattered over a
broad range, but will, like those of the intentional moderate, average to about
50.

Intentional moderates are similar to those on the far left and the far right in
that their opinions are, in a sense, not their own. The defining quality of an
ideologue, whether on the left or the right, is to acquire one's opinions in
bulk. You don't get to pick and choose. Your opinions about taxation can be
predicted from your opinions about same-sex marriage. And although intentional
moderates might seem to be the opposite of ideologues, their beliefs (though in
their case the word "positions" might be more accurate) are also acquired in
bulk. If the median opinion shifts to the right or left, the intentional
moderate must shift with it. Otherwise they stop being moderate.

Accidental moderates, on the other hand, not only choose their own answers, but
choose their own questions. They may not care at all about questions that the
left and right both think are terribly important. So you can only even measure
the politics of an accidental moderate from the intersection of the questions
they care about and those the left and right care about, and this can sometimes
be vanishingly small.

It is not merely a manipulative rhetorical trick to say "if you're not with us,
you're against us," but often simply false.

Moderates are sometimes derided as cowards, particularly by the extreme left.
But while it may be accurate to call intentional moderates cowards, openly
being an accidental moderate requires the most courage of all, because you get
attacked from both right and left, and you don't have the comfort of being an
orthodox member of a large group to sustain you.

Nearly all the most impressive people I know are accidental moderates. If I
knew a lot of professional athletes, or people in the entertainment business,
that might be different. Being on the far left or far right doesn't affect how
fast you run or how well you sing. But someone who works with ideas has to be
independent-minded to do it well.

Or more precisely, you have to be independent-minded about the ideas you work
with. You could be mindlessly doctrinaire in your politics and still be a good
mathematician. In the 20th century, a lot of very smart people were Marxists —
just no one who was smart about the subjects Marxism involves. But if the ideas
you use in your work intersect with the politics of your time, you have two
choices: be an accidental moderate, or be mediocre.

There are some kinds of work that you can't do well without thinking
differently from your peers. To be a successful scientist, for example, it's
not enough just to be correct. Your ideas have to be both correct and novel.
You can't publish papers saying things other people already know. You need to
say things no one else has realized yet.

The same is true for investors. It's not enough for a public market investor to
predict correctly how a company will do. If a lot of other people make the same
prediction, the stock price will already reflect it, and there's no room to
make money. The only valuable insights are the ones most other investors don't
share.

You see this pattern with startup founders too. You don't want to start a
startup to do something that everyone agrees is a good idea, or there will
already be other companies doing it. You have to do something that sounds to
most other people like a bad idea, but that you know isn't — like writing
software for a tiny computer used by a few thousand hobbyists, or starting a
site to let people rent airbeds on strangers' floors.

Ditto for essayists. An essay that told people things they already knew would
be boring. You have to tell them something new.

But this pattern isn't universal. In fact, it doesn't hold for most kinds of
work. In most kinds of work — to be an administrator, for example — all you
need is the first half. All you need is to be right. It's not essential that
everyone else be wrong.

There's room for a little novelty in most kinds of work, but in practice
there's a fairly sharp distinction between the kinds of work where it's
essential to be independent-minded, and the kinds where it's not.

I wish someone had told me about this distinction when I was a kid, because
it's one of the most important things to think about when you're deciding what
kind of work you want to do. Do you want to do the kind of work where you can
only win by thinking differently from everyone else? I suspect most people's
unconscious mind will answer that question before their conscious mind has a
chance to. I know mine does.

Independent-mindedness seems to be more a matter of nature than nurture. Which
means if you pick the wrong type of work, you're going to be unhappy. If you're
naturally independent-minded, you're going to find it frustrating to be a
middle manager. And if you're naturally conventional-minded, you're going to be
sailing into a headwind if you try to do original research.

One difficulty here, though, is that people are often mistaken about where they
fall on the spectrum from conventional- to independent-minded.
Conventional-minded people don't like to think of themselves as
conventional-minded. And in any case, it genuinely feels to them as if they
make up their own minds about everything. It's just a coincidence that their
beliefs are identical to their peers'. And the independent-minded, meanwhile,
are often unaware how different their ideas are from conventional ones, at
least till they state them publicly. [1]

By the time they reach adulthood, most people know roughly how smart they are
(in the narrow sense of ability to solve pre-set problems), because they're
constantly being tested and ranked according to it. But schools generally
ignore independent-mindedness, except to the extent they try to suppress it. So
we don't get anything like the same kind of feedback about how
independent-minded we are.

There may even be a phenomenon like Dunning-Kruger at work, where the most
conventional-minded people are confident that they're independent-minded, while
the genuinely independent-minded worry they might not be independent-minded
enough.

___________


Can you make yourself more independent-minded? I think so. This quality may be
largely inborn, but there seem to be ways to magnify it, or at least not to
suppress it.

One of the most effective techniques is one practiced unintentionally by most
nerds: simply to be less aware what conventional beliefs are. It's hard to be a
conformist if you don't know what you're supposed to conform to. Though again,
it may be that such people already are independent-minded. A
conventional-minded person would probably feel anxious not knowing what other
people thought, and make more effort to find out.

It matters a lot who you surround yourself with. If you're surrounded by
conventional-minded people, it will constrain which ideas you can express, and
that in turn will constrain which ideas you have. But if you surround yourself
with independent-minded people, you'll have the opposite experience: hearing
other people say surprising things will encourage you to, and to think of more.

Because the independent-minded find it uncomfortable to be surrounded by
conventional-minded people, they tend to self-segregate once they have a chance
to. The problem with high school is that they haven't yet had a chance to. Plus
high school tends to be an inward-looking little world whose inhabitants lack
confidence, both of which magnify the forces of conformism. And so high school
is often a bad time for the independent-minded. But there is some advantage
even here: it teaches you what to avoid. If you later find yourself in a
situation that makes you think "this is like high school," you know you should
get out. [2]

Another place where the independent- and conventional-minded are thrown
together is in successful startups. The founders and early employees are almost
always independent-minded; otherwise the startup wouldn't be successful. But
conventional-minded people greatly outnumber independent-minded ones, so as the
company grows, the original spirit of independent-mindedness is inevitably
diluted. This causes all kinds of problems besides the obvious one that the
company starts to suck. One of the strangest is that the founders find
themselves able to speak more freely with founders of other companies than with
their own employees. [3]

Fortunately you don't have to spend all your time with independent-minded
people. It's enough to have one or two you can talk to regularly. And once you
find them, they're usually as eager to talk as you are; they need you too.
Although universities no longer have the kind of monopoly they used to have on
education, good universities are still an excellent way to meet
independent-minded people. Most students will still be conventional-minded, but
you'll at least find clumps of independent-minded ones, rather than the near
zero you may have found in high school.

It also works to go in the other direction: as well as cultivating a small
collection of independent-minded friends, to try to meet as many different
types of people as you can. It will decrease the influence of your immediate
peers if you have several other groups of peers. Plus if you're part of several
different worlds, you can often import ideas from one to another.

But by different types of people, I don't mean demographically different. For
this technique to work, they have to think differently. So while it's an
excellent idea to go and visit other countries, you can probably find people
who think differently right around the corner. When I meet someone who knows a
lot about something unusual (which includes practically everyone, if you dig
deep enough), I try to learn what they know that other people don't. There are
almost always surprises here. It's a good way to make conversation when you
meet strangers, but I don't do it to make conversation. I really want to know.

You can expand the source of influences in time as well as space, by reading
history. When I read history I do it not just to learn what happened, but to
try to get inside the heads of people who lived in the past. How did things
look to them? This is hard to do, but worth the effort for the same reason it's
worth travelling far to triangulate a point.

You can also take more explicit measures to prevent yourself from automatically
adopting conventional opinions. The most general is to cultivate an attitude of
skepticism. When you hear someone say something, stop and ask yourself "Is that
true?" Don't say it out loud. I'm not suggesting that you impose on everyone
who talks to you the burden of proving what they say, but rather that you take
upon yourself the burden of evaluating what they say.

Treat it as a puzzle. You know that some accepted ideas will later turn out to
be wrong. See if you can guess which. The end goal is not to find flaws in the
things you're told, but to find the new ideas that had been concealed by the
broken ones. So this game should be an exciting quest for novelty, not a boring
protocol for intellectual hygiene. And you'll be surprised, when you start
asking "Is this true?", how often the answer is not an immediate yes. If you
have any imagination, you're more likely to have too many leads to follow than
too few.

More generally your goal should be not to let anything into your head
unexamined, and things don't always enter your head in the form of statements.
Some of the most powerful influences are implicit. How do you even notice
these? By standing back and watching how other people get their ideas.

When you stand back at a sufficient distance, you can see ideas spreading
through groups of people like waves. The most obvious are in fashion: you
notice a few people wearing a certain kind of shirt, and then more and more,
until half the people around you are wearing the same shirt. You may not care
much what you wear, but there are intellectual fashions too, and you definitely
don't want to participate in those. Not just because you want sovereignty over
your own thoughts, but because unfashionable ideas are disproportionately
likely to lead somewhere interesting. The best place to find undiscovered ideas
is where no one else is looking. [4]

___________


To go beyond this general advice, we need to look at the internal structure of
independent-mindedness — at the individual muscles we need to exercise, as it
were. It seems to me that it has three components: fastidiousness about truth,
resistance to being told what to think, and curiosity.

Fastidiousness about truth means more than just not believing things that are
false. It means being careful about degree of belief. For most people, degree
of belief rushes unexamined toward the extremes: the unlikely becomes
impossible, and the probable becomes certain. [5] To the independent-minded,
this seems unpardonably sloppy. They're willing to have anything in their
heads, from highly speculative hypotheses to (apparent) tautologies, but on
subjects they care about, everything has to be labelled with a carefully
considered degree of belief. [6]

The independent-minded thus have a horror of ideologies, which require one to
accept a whole collection of beliefs at once, and to treat them as articles of
faith. To an independent-minded person that would seem revolting, just as it
would seem to someone fastidious about food to take a bite of a submarine
sandwich filled with a large variety of ingredients of indeterminate age and
provenance.

Without this fastidiousness about truth, you can't be truly independent-minded.
It's not enough just to have resistance to being told what to think. Those kind
of people reject conventional ideas only to replace them with the most random
conspiracy theories. And since these conspiracy theories have often been
manufactured to capture them, they end up being less independent-minded than
ordinary people, because they're subject to a much more exacting master than
mere convention. [7]

Can you increase your fastidiousness about truth? I would think so. In my
experience, merely thinking about something you're fastidious about causes that
fastidiousness to grow. If so, this is one of those rare virtues we can have
more of merely by wanting it. And if it's like other forms of fastidiousness,
it should also be possible to encourage in children. I certainly got a strong
dose of it from my father. [8]

The second component of independent-mindedness, resistance to being told what
to think, is the most visible of the three. But even this is often
misunderstood. The big mistake people make about it is to think of it as a
merely negative quality. The language we use reinforces that idea. You're
unconventional. You don't care what other people think. But it's not just a
kind of immunity. In the most independent-minded people, the desire not to be
told what to think is a positive force. It's not mere skepticism, but an active
delight in ideas that subvert the conventional wisdom, the more
counterintuitive the better.

Some of the most novel ideas seemed at the time almost like practical jokes.
Think how often your reaction to a novel idea is to laugh. I don't think it's
because novel ideas are funny per se, but because novelty and humor share a
certain kind of surprisingness. But while not identical, the two are close
enough that there is a definite correlation between having a sense of humor and
being independent-minded — just as there is between being humorless and being
conventional-minded. [9]

I don't think we can significantly increase our resistance to being told what
to think. It seems the most innate of the three components of
independent-mindedness; people who have this quality as adults usually showed
all too visible signs of it as children. But if we can't increase our
resistance to being told what to think, we can at least shore it up, by
surrounding ourselves with other independent-minded people.

The third component of independent-mindedness, curiosity, may be the most
interesting. To the extent that we can give a brief answer to the question of
where novel ideas come from, it's curiosity. That's what people are usually
feeling before having them.

In my experience, independent-mindedness and curiosity predict one another
perfectly. Everyone I know who's independent-minded is deeply curious, and
everyone I know who's conventional-minded isn't. Except, curiously, children.
All small children are curious. Perhaps the reason is that even the
conventional-minded have to be curious in the beginning, in order to learn what
the conventions are. Whereas the independent-minded are the gluttons of
curiosity, who keep eating even after they're full. [10]

The three components of independent-mindedness work in concert: fastidiousness
about truth and resistance to being told what to think leave space in your
brain, and curiosity finds new ideas to fill it.

Interestingly, the three components can substitute for one another in much the
same way muscles can. If you're sufficiently fastidious about truth, you don't
need to be as resistant to being told what to think, because fastidiousness
alone will create sufficient gaps in your knowledge. And either one can
compensate for curiosity, because if you create enough space in your brain,
your discomfort at the resulting vacuum will add force to your curiosity. Or
curiosity can compensate for them: if you're sufficiently curious, you don't
need to clear space in your brain, because the new ideas you discover will push
out the conventional ones you acquired by default.

Because the components of independent-mindedness are so interchangeable, you
can have them to varying degrees and still get the same result. So there is not
just a single model of independent-mindedness. Some independent-minded people
are openly subversive, and others are quietly curious. They all know the secret
handshake though.

Is there a way to cultivate curiosity? To start with, you want to avoid
situations that suppress it. How much does the work you're currently doing
engage your curiosity? If the answer is "not much," maybe you should change
something.

The most important active step you can take to cultivate your curiosity is
probably to seek out the topics that engage it. Few adults are equally curious
about everything, and it doesn't seem as if you can choose which topics
interest you. So it's up to you to find them. Or invent them, if necessary.

Another way to increase your curiosity is to indulge it, by investigating
things you're interested in. Curiosity is unlike most other appetites in this
respect: indulging it tends to increase rather than to sate it. Questions lead
to more questions.

Curiosity seems to be more individual than fastidiousness about truth or
resistance to being told what to think. To the degree people have the latter
two, they're usually pretty general, whereas different people can be curious
about very different things. So perhaps curiosity is the compass here. Perhaps,
if your goal is to discover novel ideas, your motto should not be "do what you
love" so much as "do what you're curious about."







Notes

[1] One convenient consequence of the fact that no one identifies as
conventional-minded is that you can say what you like about conventional-minded
people without getting in too much trouble. When I wrote "The Four Quadrants of
Conformism" I expected a firestorm of rage from the aggressively
conventional-minded, but in fact it was quite muted. They sensed that there was
something about the essay that they disliked intensely, but they had a hard
time finding a specific passage to pin it on.

[2] When I ask myself what in my life is like high school, the answer is
Twitter. It's not just full of conventional-minded people, as anything its size
will inevitably be, but subject to violent storms of conventional-mindedness
that remind me of descriptions of Jupiter. But while it probably is a net loss
to spend time there, it has at least made me think more about the distinction
between independent- and conventional-mindedness, which I probably wouldn't
have done otherwise.

[3] The decrease in independent-mindedness in growing startups is still an open
problem, but there may be solutions.

Founders can delay the problem by making a conscious effort only to hire
independent-minded people. Which of course also has the ancillary benefit that
they have better ideas.

Another possible solution is to create policies that somehow disrupt the force
of conformism, much as control rods slow chain reactions, so that the
conventional-minded aren't as dangerous. The physical separation of Lockheed's
Skunk Works may have had this as a side benefit. Recent examples suggest
employee forums like Slack may not be an unmitigated good.

The most radical solution would be to grow revenues without growing the
company. You think hiring that junior PR person will be cheap, compared to a
programmer, but what will be the effect on the average level of
independent-mindedness in your company? (The growth in staff relative to
faculty seems to have had a similar effect on universities.) Perhaps the rule
about outsourcing work that's not your "core competency" should be augmented by
one about outsourcing work done by people who'd ruin your culture as employees.

Some investment firms already seem to be able to grow revenues without growing
the number of employees. Automation plus the ever increasing articulation of
the "tech stack" suggest this may one day be possible for product companies.

[4] There are intellectual fashions in every field, but their influence varies.
One of the reasons politics, for example, tends to be boring is that it's so
extremely subject to them. The threshold for having opinions about politics is
much lower than the one for having opinions about set theory. So while there
are some ideas in politics, in practice they tend to be swamped by waves of
intellectual fashion.

[5] The conventional-minded are often fooled by the strength of their opinions
into believing that they're independent-minded. But strong convictions are not
a sign of independent-mindedness. Rather the opposite.

[6] Fastidiousness about truth doesn't imply that an independent-minded person
won't be dishonest, but that he won't be deluded. It's sort of like the
definition of a gentleman as someone who is never unintentionally rude.

[7] You see this especially among political extremists. They think themselves
nonconformists, but actually they're niche conformists. Their opinions may be
different from the average person's, but they are often more influenced by
their peers' opinions than the average person's are.

[8] If we broaden the concept of fastidiousness about truth so that it excludes
pandering, bogusness, and pomposity as well as falsehood in the strict sense,
our model of independent-mindedness can expand further into the arts.

[9] This correlation is far from perfect, though. Gödel and Dirac don't seem to
have been very strong in the humor department. But someone who is both
"neurotypical" and humorless is very likely to be conventional-minded.

[10] Exception: gossip. Almost everyone is curious about gossip.

Thanks to Trevor Blackwell, Paul Buchheit, Patrick Collison, Jessica
Livingston, Robert Morris, Harj Taggar, and Peter Thiel for reading drafts of
this.

One of the biggest things holding people back from doing great work is the fear
of making something lame. And this fear is not an irrational one. Many great
projects go through a stage early on where they don't seem very impressive,
even to their creators. You have to push through this stage to reach the great
work that lies beyond. But many people don't. Most people don't even reach the
stage of making something they're embarrassed by, let alone continue past it.
They're too frightened even to start.

Imagine if we could turn off the fear of making something lame. Imagine how
much more we'd do.

Is there any hope of turning it off? I think so. I think the habits at work
here are not very deeply rooted.

Making new things is itself a new thing for us as a species. It has always
happened, but till the last few centuries it happened so slowly as to be
invisible to individual humans. And since we didn't need customs for dealing
with new ideas, we didn't develop any.

We just don't have enough experience with early versions of ambitious projects
to know how to respond to them. We judge them as we would judge more finished
work, or less ambitious projects. We don't realize they're a special case.

Or at least, most of us don't. One reason I'm confident we can do better is
that it's already starting to happen. There are already a few places that are
living in the future in this respect. Silicon Valley is one of them: an unknown
person working on a strange-sounding idea won't automatically be dismissed the
way they would back home. In Silicon Valley, people have learned how dangerous
that is.

The right way to deal with new ideas is to treat them as a challenge to your
imagination — not just to have lower standards, but to switch polarity
entirely, from listing the reasons an idea won't work to trying to think of
ways it could. That's what I do when I meet people with new ideas. I've become
quite good at it, but I've had a lot of practice. Being a partner at Y
Combinator means being practically immersed in strange-sounding ideas proposed
by unknown people. Every six months you get thousands of new ones thrown at you
and have to sort through them, knowing that in a world with a power-law
distribution of outcomes, it will be painfully obvious if you miss the needle
in this haystack. Optimism becomes urgent.

But I'm hopeful that, with time, this kind of optimism can become widespread
enough that it becomes a social custom, not just a trick used by a few
specialists. It is after all an extremely lucrative trick, and those tend to
spread quickly.

Of course, inexperience is not the only reason people are too harsh on early
versions of ambitious projects. They also do it to seem clever. And in a field
where the new ideas are risky, like startups, those who dismiss them are in
fact more likely to be right. Just not when their predictions are weighted by
outcome.

But there is another more sinister reason people dismiss new ideas. If you try
something ambitious, many of those around you will hope, consciously or
unconsciously, that you'll fail. They worry that if you try something ambitious
and succeed, it will put you above them. In some countries this is not just an
individual failing but part of the national culture.

I wouldn't claim that people in Silicon Valley overcome these impulses because
they're morally better. [1] The reason many hope you'll succeed is that they
hope to rise with you. For investors this incentive is particularly explicit.
They want you to succeed because they hope you'll make them rich in the
process. But many other people you meet can hope to benefit in some way from
your success. At the very least they'll be able to say, when you're famous,
that they've known you since way back.

But even if Silicon Valley's encouraging attitude is rooted in self-interest,
it has over time actually grown into a sort of benevolence. Encouraging
startups has been practiced for so long that it has become a custom. Now it
just seems that that's what one does with startups.

Maybe Silicon Valley is too optimistic. Maybe it's too easily fooled by
impostors. Many less optimistic journalists want to believe that. But the lists
of impostors they cite are suspiciously short, and plagued with asterisks. [2]
If you use revenue as the test, Silicon Valley's optimism seems better tuned
than the rest of the world's. And because it works, it will spread.

There's a lot more to new ideas than new startup ideas, of course. The fear of
making something lame holds people back in every field. But Silicon Valley
shows how quickly customs can evolve to support new ideas. And that in turn
proves that dismissing new ideas is not so deeply rooted in human nature that
it can't be unlearnt.

___________


Unfortunately, if you want to do new things, you'll face a force more powerful
than other people's skepticism: your own skepticism. You too will judge your
early work too harshly. How do you avoid that?

This is a difficult problem, because you don't want to completely eliminate
your horror of making something lame. That's what steers you toward doing good
work. You just want to turn it off temporarily, the way a painkiller
temporarily turns off pain.

People have already discovered several techniques that work. Hardy mentions two
in A Mathematician's Apology:

    Good work is not done by "humble" men. It is one of the first duties of a
    professor, for example, in any subject, to exaggerate a little both the
    importance of his subject and his importance in it. 

If you overestimate the importance of what you're working on, that will
compensate for your mistakenly harsh judgment of your initial results. If you
look at something that's 20% of the way to a goal worth 100 and conclude that
it's 10% of the way to a goal worth 200, your estimate of its expected value is
correct even though both components are wrong.

It also helps, as Hardy suggests, to be slightly overconfident. I've noticed in
many fields that the most successful people are slightly overconfident. On the
face of it this seems implausible. Surely it would be optimal to have exactly
the right estimate of one's abilities. How could it be an advantage to be
mistaken? Because this error compensates for other sources of error in the
opposite direction: being slightly overconfident armors you against both other
people's skepticism and your own.

Ignorance has a similar effect. It's safe to make the mistake of judging early
work as finished work if you're a sufficiently lax judge of finished work. I
doubt it's possible to cultivate this kind of ignorance, but empirically it's a
real advantage, especially for the young.

Another way to get through the lame phase of ambitious projects is to surround
yourself with the right people — to create an eddy in the social headwind. But
it's not enough to collect people who are always encouraging. You'd learn to
discount that. You need colleagues who can actually tell an ugly duckling from
a baby swan. The people best able to do this are those working on similar
projects of their own, which is why university departments and research labs
work so well. You don't need institutions to collect colleagues. They naturally
coalesce, given the chance. But it's very much worth accelerating this process
by seeking out other people trying to do new things.

Teachers are in effect a special case of colleagues. It's a teacher's job both
to see the promise of early work and to encourage you to continue. But teachers
who are good at this are unfortunately quite rare, so if you have the
opportunity to learn from one, take it. [3]

For some it might work to rely on sheer discipline: to tell yourself that you
just have to press on through the initial crap phase and not get discouraged.
But like a lot of "just tell yourself" advice, this is harder than it sounds.
And it gets still harder as you get older, because your standards rise. The old
do have one compensating advantage though: they've been through this before.

It can help if you focus less on where you are and more on the rate of change.
You won't worry so much about doing bad work if you can see it improving.
Obviously the faster it improves, the easier this is. So when you start
something new, it's good if you can spend a lot of time on it. That's another
advantage of being young: you tend to have bigger blocks of time.

Another common trick is to start by considering new work to be of a different,
less exacting type. To start a painting saying that it's just a sketch, or a
new piece of software saying that it's just a quick hack. Then you judge your
initial results by a lower standard. Once the project is rolling you can
sneakily convert it to something more. [4]

This will be easier if you use a medium that lets you work fast and doesn't
require too much commitment up front. It's easier to convince yourself that
something is just a sketch when you're drawing in a notebook than when you're
carving stone. Plus you get initial results faster. [5] [6]

It will be easier to try out a risky project if you think of it as a way to
learn and not just as a way to make something. Then even if the project truly
is a failure, you'll still have gained by it. If the problem is sharply enough
defined, failure itself is knowledge: if the theorem you're trying to prove
turns out to be false, or you use a structural member of a certain size and it
fails under stress, you've learned something, even if it isn't what you wanted
to learn. [7]

One motivation that works particularly well for me is curiosity. I like to try
new things just to see how they'll turn out. We started Y Combinator in this
spirit, and it was one of main things that kept me going while I was working on
Bel. Having worked for so long with various dialects of Lisp, I was very
curious to see what its inherent shape was: what you'd end up with if you
followed the axiomatic approach all the way.

But it's a bit strange that you have to play mind games with yourself to avoid
being discouraged by lame-looking early efforts. The thing you're trying to
trick yourself into believing is in fact the truth. A lame-looking early
version of an ambitious project truly is more valuable than it seems. So the
ultimate solution may be to teach yourself that.

One way to do it is to study the histories of people who've done great work.
What were they thinking early on? What was the very first thing they did? It
can sometimes be hard to get an accurate answer to this question, because
people are often embarrassed by their earliest work and make little effort to
publish it. (They too misjudge it.) But when you can get an accurate picture of
the first steps someone made on the path to some great work, they're often
pretty feeble. [8]

Perhaps if you study enough such cases, you can teach yourself to be a better
judge of early work. Then you'll be immune both to other people's skepticism
and your own fear of making something lame. You'll see early work for what it
is.

Curiously enough, the solution to the problem of judging early work too harshly
is to realize that our attitudes toward it are themselves early work. Holding
everything to the same standard is a crude version 1. We're already evolving
better customs, and we can already see signs of how big the payoff will be.









Notes

[1] This assumption may be too conservative. There is some evidence that
historically the Bay Area has attracted a different sort of person than, say,
New York City.

[2] One of their great favorites is Theranos. But the most conspicuous feature
of Theranos's cap table is the absence of Silicon Valley firms. Journalists
were fooled by Theranos, but Silicon Valley investors weren't.

[3] I made two mistakes about teachers when I was younger. I cared more about
professors' research than their reputations as teachers, and I was also wrong
about what it meant to be a good teacher. I thought it simply meant to be good
at explaining things.

[4] Patrick Collison points out that you can go past treating something as a
hack in the sense of a prototype and onward to the sense of the word that means
something closer to a practical joke:

    I think there may be something related to being a hack that can be powerful
    — the idea of making the tenuousness and implausibility a feature. "Yes,
    it's a bit ridiculous, right? I'm just trying to see how far such a naive
    approach can get." YC seemed to me to have this characteristic. 

[5] Much of the advantage of switching from physical to digital media is not
the software per se but that it lets you start something new with little
upfront commitment.

[6] John Carmack adds:

    The value of a medium without a vast gulf between the early work and the
    final work is exemplified in game mods. The original Quake game was a
    golden age for mods, because everything was very flexible, but so crude due
    to technical limitations, that quick hacks to try out a gameplay idea
    weren't all that far from the official game. Many careers were born from
    that, but as the commercial game quality improved over the years, it became
    almost a full time job to make a successful mod that would be appreciated
    by the community. This was dramatically reversed with Minecraft and later
    Roblox, where the entire esthetic of the experience was so explicitly crude
    that innovative gameplay concepts became the overriding value. These
    "crude" game mods by single authors are now often bigger deals than massive
    professional teams' work. 

[7] Lisa Randall suggests that we

    treat new things as experiments. That way there's no such thing as failing,
    since you learn something no matter what. You treat it like an experiment
    in the sense that if it really rules something out, you give up and move
    on, but if there's some way to vary it to make it work better, go ahead and
    do that 

[8] Michael Nielsen points out that the internet has made this easier, because
you can see programmers' first commits, musicians' first videos, and so on.



Thanks to Trevor Blackwell, John Carmack, Patrick Collison, Jessica Livingston,
Michael Nielsen, and Lisa Randall for reading drafts of this.

One of the most revealing ways to classify people is by the degree and
aggressiveness of their conformism. Imagine a Cartesian coordinate system whose
horizontal axis runs from conventional-minded on the left to independent-minded
on the right, and whose vertical axis runs from passive at the bottom to
aggressive at the top. The resulting four quadrants define four types of
people. Starting in the upper left and going counter-clockwise: aggressively
conventional-minded, passively conventional-minded, passively
independent-minded, and aggressively independent-minded.

I think that you'll find all four types in most societies, and that which
quadrant people fall into depends more on their own personality than the
beliefs prevalent in their society. [1]

Young children offer some of the best evidence for both points. Anyone who's
been to primary school has seen the four types, and the fact that school rules
are so arbitrary is strong evidence that the quadrant people fall into depends
more on them than the rules.

The kids in the upper left quadrant, the aggressively conventional-minded ones,
are the tattletales. They believe not only that rules must be obeyed, but that
those who disobey them must be punished.

The kids in the lower left quadrant, the passively conventional-minded, are the
sheep. They're careful to obey the rules, but when other kids break them, their
impulse is to worry that those kids will be punished, not to ensure that they
will.

The kids in the lower right quadrant, the passively independent-minded, are the
dreamy ones. They don't care much about rules and probably aren't 100% sure
what the rules even are.

And the kids in the upper right quadrant, the aggressively independent-minded,
are the naughty ones. When they see a rule, their first impulse is to question
it. Merely being told what to do makes them inclined to do the opposite.

When measuring conformism, of course, you have to say with respect to what, and
this changes as kids get older. For younger kids it's the rules set by adults.
But as kids get older, the source of rules becomes their peers. So a pack of
teenagers who all flout school rules in the same way are not
independent-minded; rather the opposite.

In adulthood we can recognize the four types by their distinctive calls, much
as you could recognize four species of birds. The call of the aggressively
conventional-minded is "Crush <outgroup>!" (It's rather alarming to see an
exclamation point after a variable, but that's the whole problem with the
aggressively conventional-minded.) The call of the passively
conventional-minded is "What will the neighbors think?" The call of the
passively independent-minded is "To each his own." And the call of the
aggressively independent-minded is "Eppur si muove."

The four types are not equally common. There are more passive people than
aggressive ones, and far more conventional-minded people than
independent-minded ones. So the passively conventional-minded are the largest
group, and the aggressively independent-minded the smallest.

Since one's quadrant depends more on one's personality than the nature of the
rules, most people would occupy the same quadrant even if they'd grown up in a
quite different society.

Princeton professor Robert George recently wrote:

    I sometimes ask students what their position on slavery would have been had
    they been white and living in the South before abolition. Guess what? They
    all would have been abolitionists! They all would have bravely spoken out
    against slavery, and worked tirelessly against it. 

He's too polite to say so, but of course they wouldn't. And indeed, our default
assumption should not merely be that his students would, on average, have
behaved the same way people did at the time, but that the ones who are
aggressively conventional-minded today would have been aggressively
conventional-minded then too. In other words, that they'd not only not have
fought against slavery, but that they'd have been among its staunchest
defenders.

I'm biased, I admit, but it seems to me that aggressively conventional-minded
people are responsible for a disproportionate amount of the trouble in the
world, and that a lot of the customs we've evolved since the Enlightenment have
been designed to protect the rest of us from them. In particular, the
retirement of the concept of heresy and its replacement by the principle of
freely debating all sorts of different ideas, even ones that are currently
considered unacceptable, without any punishment for those who try them out to
see if they work. [2]

Why do the independent-minded need to be protected, though? Because they have
all the new ideas. To be a successful scientist, for example, it's not enough
just to be right. You have to be right when everyone else is wrong.
Conventional-minded people can't do that. For similar reasons, all successful
startup CEOs are not merely independent-minded, but aggressively so. So it's no
coincidence that societies prosper only to the extent that they have customs
for keeping the conventional-minded at bay. [3]

In the last few years, many of us have noticed that the customs protecting free
inquiry have been weakened. Some say we're overreacting — that they haven't
been weakened very much, or that they've been weakened in the service of a
greater good. The latter I'll dispose of immediately. When the
conventional-minded get the upper hand, they always say it's in the service of
a greater good. It just happens to be a different, incompatible greater good
each time.

As for the former worry, that the independent-minded are being oversensitive,
and that free inquiry hasn't been shut down that much, you can't judge that
unless you are yourself independent-minded. You can't know how much of the
space of ideas is being lopped off unless you have them, and only the
independent-minded have the ones at the edges. Precisely because of this, they
tend to be very sensitive to changes in how freely one can explore ideas.
They're the canaries in this coalmine.

The conventional-minded say, as they always do, that they don't want to shut
down the discussion of all ideas, just the bad ones.

You'd think it would be obvious just from that sentence what a dangerous game
they're playing. But I'll spell it out. There are two reasons why we need to be
able to discuss even "bad" ideas.

The first is that any process for deciding which ideas to ban is bound to make
mistakes. All the more so because no one intelligent wants to undertake that
kind of work, so it ends up being done by the stupid. And when a process makes
a lot of mistakes, you need to leave a margin for error. Which in this case
means you need to ban fewer ideas than you'd like to. But that's hard for the
aggressively conventional-minded to do, partly because they enjoy seeing people
punished, as they have since they were children, and partly because they
compete with one another. Enforcers of orthodoxy can't allow a borderline idea
to exist, because that gives other enforcers an opportunity to one-up them in
the moral purity department, and perhaps even to turn enforcer upon them. So
instead of getting the margin for error we need, we get the opposite: a race to
the bottom in which any idea that seems at all bannable ends up being banned.
[4]

The second reason it's dangerous to ban the discussion of ideas is that ideas
are more closely related than they look. Which means if you restrict the
discussion of some topics, it doesn't only affect those topics. The
restrictions propagate back into any topic that yields implications in the
forbidden ones. And that is not an edge case. The best ideas do exactly that:
they have consequences in fields far removed from their origins. Having ideas
in a world where some ideas are banned is like playing soccer on a pitch that
has a minefield in one corner. You don't just play the same game you would
have, but on a different shaped pitch. You play a much more subdued game even
on the ground that's safe.

In the past, the way the independent-minded protected themselves was to
congregate in a handful of places — first in courts, and later in universities
— where they could to some extent make their own rules. Places where people
work with ideas tend to have customs protecting free inquiry, for the same
reason wafer fabs have powerful air filters, or recording studios good sound
insulation. For the last couple centuries at least, when the aggressively
conventional-minded were on the rampage for whatever reason, universities were
the safest places to be.

That may not work this time though, due to the unfortunate fact that the latest
wave of intolerance began in universities. It began in the mid 1980s, and by
2000 seemed to have died down, but it has recently flared up again with the
arrival of social media. This seems, unfortunately, to have been an own goal by
Silicon Valley. Though the people who run Silicon Valley are almost all
independent-minded, they've handed the aggressively conventional-minded a tool
such as they could only have dreamed of.

On the other hand, perhaps the decline in the spirit of free inquiry within
universities is as much the symptom of the departure of the independent-minded
as the cause. People who would have become professors 50 years ago have other
options now. Now they can become quants or start startups. You have to be
independent-minded to succeed at either of those. If these people had been
professors, they'd have put up a stiffer resistance on behalf of academic
freedom. So perhaps the picture of the independent-minded fleeing declining
universities is too gloomy. Perhaps the universities are declining because so
many have already left. [5]

Though I've spent a lot of time thinking about this situation, I can't predict
how it plays out. Could some universities reverse the current trend and remain
places where the independent-minded want to congregate? Or will the
independent-minded gradually abandon them? I worry a lot about what we might
lose if that happened.

But I'm hopeful long term. The independent-minded are good at protecting
themselves. If existing institutions are compromised, they'll create new ones.
That may require some imagination. But imagination is, after all, their
specialty.













Notes

[1] I realize of course that if people's personalities vary in any two ways,
you can use them as axes and call the resulting four quadrants personality
types. So what I'm really claiming is that the axes are orthogonal and that
there's significant variation in both.

[2] The aggressively conventional-minded aren't responsible for all the trouble
in the world. Another big source of trouble is the sort of charismatic leader
who gains power by appealing to them. They become much more dangerous when such
leaders emerge.

[3] I never worried about writing things that offended the conventional-minded
when I was running Y Combinator. If YC were a cookie company, I'd have faced a
difficult moral choice. Conventional-minded people eat cookies too. But they
don't start successful startups. So if I deterred them from applying to YC, the
only effect was to save us work reading applications.

[4] There has been progress in one area: the punishments for talking about
banned ideas are less severe than in the past. There's little danger of being
killed, at least in richer countries. The aggressively conventional-minded are
mostly satisfied with getting people fired.

[5] Many professors are independent-minded — especially in math, the hard
sciences, and engineering, where you have to be to succeed. But students are
more representative of the general population, and thus mostly
conventional-minded. So when professors and students are in conflict, it's not
just a conflict between generations but also between different types of people.



Thanks to Sam Altman, Trevor Blackwell, Nicholas Christakis, Patrick Collison,
Sam Gichuru, Jessica Livingston, Patrick McKenzie, Geoff Ralston, and Harj
Taggar for reading drafts of this.

Because biographies of famous scientists tend to edit out their mistakes, we
underestimate the degree of risk they were willing to take. And because
anything a famous scientist did that wasn't a mistake has probably now become
the conventional wisdom, those choices don't seem risky either.

Biographies of Newton, for example, understandably focus more on physics than
alchemy or theology. The impression we get is that his unerring judgment led
him straight to truths no one else had noticed. How to explain all the time he
spent on alchemy and theology? Well, smart people are often kind of crazy.

But maybe there is a simpler explanation. Maybe the smartness and the craziness
were not as separate as we think. Physics seems to us a promising thing to work
on, and alchemy and theology obvious wastes of time. But that's because we know
how things turned out. In Newton's day the three problems seemed roughly
equally promising. No one knew yet what the payoff would be for inventing what
we now call physics; if they had, more people would have been working on it.
And alchemy and theology were still then in the category Marc Andreessen would
describe as "huge, if true."

Newton made three bets. One of them worked. But they were all risky.

If you have a US startup called X and you don't have x.com, you should probably
change your name.

The reason is not just that people can't find you. For companies with mobile
apps, especially, having the right domain name is not as critical as it used to
be for getting users. The problem with not having the .com of your name is that
it signals weakness. Unless you're so big that your reputation precedes you, a
marginal domain suggests you're a marginal company. Whereas (as Stripe shows)
having x.com signals strength even if it has no relation to what you do.

Even good founders can be in denial about this. Their denial derives from two
very powerful forces: identity, and lack of imagination.

X is what we are, founders think. There's no other name as good. Both of which
are false.

You can fix the first by stepping back from the problem. Imagine you'd called
your company something else. If you had, surely you'd be just as attached to
that name as you are to your current one. The idea of switching to your current
name would seem repellent. [1]

There's nothing intrinsically great about your current name. Nearly all your
attachment to it comes from it being attached to you. [2]

The way to neutralize the second source of denial, your inability to think of
other potential names, is to acknowledge that you're bad at naming. Naming is a
completely separate skill from those you need to be a good founder. You can be
a great startup founder but hopeless at thinking of names for your company.

Once you acknowledge that, you stop believing there is nothing else you could
be called. There are lots of other potential names that are as good or better;
you just can't think of them.

How do you find them? One answer is the default way to solve problems you're
bad at: find someone else who can think of names. But with company names there
is another possible approach. It turns out almost any word or word pair that is
not an obviously bad name is a sufficiently good one, and the number of such
domains is so large that you can find plenty that are cheap or even untaken. So
make a list and try to buy some. That's what Stripe did. (Their search also
turned up parse.com, which their friends at Parse took.)

The reason I know that naming companies is a distinct skill orthogonal to the
others you need in a startup is that I happen to have it. Back when I was
running YC and did more office hours with startups, I would often help them
find new names. 80% of the time we could find at least one good name in a 20
minute office hour slot.

Now when I do office hours I have to focus on more important questions, like
what the company is doing. I tell them when they need to change their name. But
I know the power of the forces that have them in their grip, so I know most
won't listen. [3]

There are of course examples of startups that have succeeded without having the
.com of their name. There are startups that have succeeded despite any number
of different mistakes. But this mistake is less excusable than most. It's
something that can be fixed in a couple days if you have sufficient discipline
to acknowledge the problem.

100% of the top 20 YC companies by valuation have the .com of their name. 94%
of the top 50 do. But only 66% of companies in the current batch have the .com
of their name. Which suggests there are lessons ahead for most of the rest, one
way or another.

Most startups that raise money do it more than once. A typical trajectory might
be (1) to get started with a few tens of thousands from something like Y
Combinator or individual angels, then (2) raise a few hundred thousand to a few
million to build the company, and then (3) once the company is clearly
succeeding, raise one or more later rounds to accelerate growth.

Reality can be messier. Some companies raise money twice in phase 2. Others
skip phase 1 and go straight to phase 2. And at Y Combinator we get an
increasing number of companies that have already raised amounts in the hundreds
of thousands. But the three phase path is at least the one about which
individual startups' paths oscillate.

This essay focuses on phase 2 fundraising. That's the type the startups we fund
are doing on Demo Day, and this essay is the advice we give them.

Forces

Fundraising is hard in both senses: hard like lifting a heavy weight, and hard
like solving a puzzle. It's hard like lifting a weight because it's
intrinsically hard to convince people to part with large sums of money. That
problem is irreducible; it should be hard. But much of the other kind of
difficulty can be eliminated. Fundraising only seems a puzzle because it's an
alien world to most founders, and I hope to fix that by supplying a map through
it.

To founders, the behavior of investors is often opaque — partly because their
motivations are obscure, but partly because they deliberately mislead you. And
the misleading ways of investors combine horribly with the wishful thinking of
inexperienced founders. At YC we're always warning founders about this danger,
and investors are probably more circumspect with YC startups than with other
companies they talk to, and even so we witness a constant series of explosions
as these two volatile components combine. [1]

If you're an inexperienced founder, the only way to survive is by imposing
external constraints on yourself. You can't trust your intuitions. I'm going to
give you a set of rules here that will get you through this process if anything
will. At certain moments you'll be tempted to ignore them. So rule number zero
is: these rules exist for a reason. You wouldn't need a rule to keep you going
in one direction if there weren't powerful forces pushing you in another.

The ultimate source of the forces acting on you are the forces acting on
investors. Investors are pinched between two kinds of fear: fear of investing
in startups that fizzle, and fear of missing out on startups that take off. The
cause of all this fear is the very thing that makes startups such attractive
investments: the successful ones grow very fast. But that fast growth means
investors can't wait around. If you wait till a startup is obviously a success,
it's too late. To get the really high returns, you have to invest in startups
when it's still unclear how they'll do. But that in turn makes investors
nervous they're about to invest in a flop. As indeed they often are.

What investors would like to do, if they could, is wait. When a startup is only
a few months old, every week that passes gives you significantly more
information about them. But if you wait too long, other investors might take
the deal away from you. And of course the other investors are all subject to
the same forces. So what tends to happen is that they all wait as long as they
can, then when some act the rest have to.

Don't raise money unless you want it and it wants you.

Such a high proportion of successful startups raise money that it might seem
fundraising is one of the defining qualities of a startup. Actually it isn't.
Rapid growth is what makes a company a startup. Most companies in a position to
grow rapidly find that (a) taking outside money helps them grow faster, and (b)
their growth potential makes it easy to attract such money. It's so common for
both (a) and (b) to be true of a successful startup that practically all do
raise outside money. But there may be cases where a startup either wouldn't
want to grow faster, or outside money wouldn't help them to, and if you're one
of them, don't raise money.

The other time not to raise money is when you won't be able to. If you try to
raise money before you can convince investors, you'll not only waste your time,
but also burn your reputation with those investors.

Be in fundraising mode or not.

One of the things that surprises founders most about fundraising is how
distracting it is. When you start fundraising, everything else grinds to a
halt. The problem is not the time fundraising consumes but that it becomes the
top idea in your mind. A startup can't endure that level of distraction for
long. An early stage startup grows mostly because the founders make it grow,
and if the founders look away, growth usually drops sharply.

Because fundraising is so distracting, a startup should either be in
fundraising mode or not. And when you do decide to raise money, you should
focus your whole attention on it so you can get it done quickly and get back to
work. [2]

You can take money from investors when you're not in fundraising mode. You just
can't expend any attention on it. There are two things that take attention:
convincing investors, and negotiating with them. So when you're not in
fundraising mode, you should take money from investors only if they require no
convincing, and are willing to invest on terms you'll take without negotiation.
For example, if a reputable investor is willing to invest on a convertible
note, using standard paperwork, that is either uncapped or capped at a good
valuation, you can take that without having to think. [3] The terms will be
whatever they turn out to be in your next equity round. And "no convincing"
means just that: zero time spent meeting with investors or preparing materials
for them. If an investor says they're ready to invest, but they need you to
come in for one meeting to meet some of the partners, tell them no, if you're
not in fundraising mode, because that's fundraising. [4] Tell them politely;
tell them you're focusing on the company right now, and that you'll get back to
them when you're fundraising; but do not get sucked down the slippery slope.

Investors will try to lure you into fundraising when you're not. It's great for
them if they can, because they can thereby get a shot at you before everyone
else. They'll send you emails saying they want to meet to learn more about you.
If you get cold-emailed by an associate at a VC firm, you shouldn't meet even
if you are in fundraising mode. Deals don't happen that way. [5] But even if
you get an email from a partner you should try to delay meeting till you're in
fundraising mode. They may say they just want to meet and chat, but investors
never just want to meet and chat. What if they like you? What if they start to
talk about giving you money? Will you be able to resist having that
conversation? Unless you're experienced enough at fundraising to have a casual
conversation with investors that stays casual, it's safer to tell them that
you'd be happy to later, when you're fundraising, but that right now you need
to focus on the company. [6]

Companies that are successful at raising money in phase 2 sometimes tack on a
few investors after leaving fundraising mode. This is fine; if fundraising went
well, you'll be able to do it without spending time convincing them or
negotiating about terms.

Get introductions to investors.

Before you can talk to investors, you have to be introduced to them. If you're
presenting at a Demo Day, you'll be introduced to a whole bunch simultaneously.
But even if you are, you should supplement these with intros you collect
yourself.

Do you have to be introduced? In phase 2, yes. Some investors will let you
email them a business plan, but you can tell from the way their sites are
organized that they don't really want startups to approach them directly.

Intros vary greatly in effectiveness. The best type of intro is from a
well-known investor who has just invested in you. So when you get an investor
to commit, ask them to introduce you to other investors they respect. [7] The
next best type of intro is from a founder of a company they've funded. You can
also get intros from other people in the startup community, like lawyers and
reporters.

There are now sites like AngelList, FundersClub, and WeFunder that can
introduce you to investors. We recommend startups treat them as auxiliary
sources of money. Raise money first from leads you get yourself. Those will on
average be better investors. Plus you'll have an easier time raising money on
these sites once you can say you've already raised some from well-known
investors.

Hear no till you hear yes.

Treat investors as saying no till they unequivocally say yes, in the form of a
definite offer with no contingencies.

I mentioned earlier that investors prefer to wait if they can. What's
particularly dangerous for founders is the way they wait. Essentially, they
lead you on. They seem like they're about to invest right up till the moment
they say no. If they even say no. Some of the worse ones never actually do say
no; they just stop replying to your emails. They hope that way to get a free
option on investing. If they decide later that they want to invest — usually
because they've heard you're a hot deal — they can pretend they just got
distracted and then restart the conversation as if they'd been about to. [8]

That's not the worst thing investors will do. Some will use language that makes
it sound as if they're committing, but which doesn't actually commit them. And
wishful thinking founders are happy to meet them half way. [9]

Fortunately, the next rule is a tactic for neutralizing this behavior. But to
work it depends on you not being tricked by the no that sounds like yes. It's
so common for founders to be misled/mistaken about this that we designed a
protocol to fix the problem. If you believe an investor has committed, get them
to confirm it. If you and they have different views of reality, whether the
source of the discrepancy is their sketchiness or your wishful thinking, the
prospect of confirming a commitment in writing will flush it out. And till they
confirm, regard them as saying no.

Do breadth-first search weighted by expected value.

When you talk to investors your m.o. should be breadth-first search, weighted
by expected value. You should always talk to investors in parallel rather than
serially. You can't afford the time it takes to talk to investors serially,
plus if you only talk to one investor at a time, they don't have the pressure
of other investors to make them act. But you shouldn't pay the same attention
to every investor, because some are more promising prospects than others. The
optimal solution is to talk to all potential investors in parallel, but give
higher priority to the more promising ones. [10]

Expected value = how likely an investor is to say yes, multiplied by how good
it would be if they did. So for example, an eminent investor who would invest a
lot, but will be hard to convince, might have the same expected value as an
obscure angel who won't invest much, but will be easy to convince. Whereas an
obscure angel who will only invest a small amount, and yet needs to meet
multiple times before making up his mind, has very low expected value. Meet
such investors last, if at all. [11]

Doing breadth-first search weighted by expected value will save you from
investors who never explicitly say no but merely drift away, because you'll
drift away from them at the same rate. It protects you from investors who flake
in much the same way that a distributed algorithm protects you from processors
that fail. If some investor isn't returning your emails, or wants to have lots
of meetings but isn't progressing toward making you an offer, you automatically
focus less on them. But you have to be disciplined about assigning
probabilities. You can't let how much you want an investor influence your
estimate of how much they want you.

Know where you stand.

How do you judge how well you're doing with an investor, when investors
habitually seem more positive than they are? By looking at their actions rather
than their words. Every investor has some track they need to move along from
the first conversation to wiring the money, and you should always know what
that track consists of, where you are on it, and how fast you're moving
forward.

Never leave a meeting with an investor without asking what happens next. What
more do they need in order to decide? Do they need another meeting with you? To
talk about what? And how soon? Do they need to do something internally, like
talk to their partners, or investigate some issue? How long do they expect it
to take? Don't be too pushy, but know where you stand. If investors are vague
or resist answering such questions, assume the worst; investors who are
seriously interested in you will usually be happy to talk about what has to
happen between now and wiring the money, because they're already running
through that in their heads. [12]

If you're experienced at negotiations, you already know how to ask such
questions. [13] If you're not, there's a trick you can use in this situation.
Investors know you're inexperienced at raising money. Inexperience there
doesn't make you unattractive. Being a noob at technology would, if you're
starting a technology startup, but not being a noob at fundraising. Larry and
Sergey were noobs at fundraising. So you can just confess that you're
inexperienced at this and ask how their process works and where you are in it.
[14]

Get the first commitment.

The biggest factor in most investors' opinions of you is the opinion of other
investors. Once you start getting investors to commit, it becomes increasingly
easy to get more to. But the other side of this coin is that it's often hard to
get the first commitment.

Getting the first substantial offer can be half the total difficulty of
fundraising. What counts as a substantial offer depends on who it's from and
how much it is. Money from friends and family doesn't usually count, no matter
how much. But if you get $50k from a well known VC firm or angel investor, that
will usually be enough to set things rolling. [15]

Close committed money.

It's not a deal till the money's in the bank. I often hear inexperienced
founders say things like "We've raised $800,000," only to discover that zero of
it is in the bank so far. Remember the twin fears that torment investors? The
fear of missing out that makes them jump early, and the fear of jumping onto a
turd that results? This is a market where people are exceptionally prone to
buyer's remorse. And it's also one that furnishes them plenty of excuses to
gratify it. The public markets snap startup investing around like a whip. If
the Chinese economy blows up tomorrow, all bets are off. But there are lots of
surprises for individual startups too, and they tend to be concentrated around
fundraising. Tomorrow a big competitor could appear, or you could get C&Ded, or
your cofounder could quit. [16]

Even a day's delay can bring news that causes an investor to change their mind.
So when someone commits, get the money. Knowing where you stand doesn't end
when they say they'll invest. After they say yes, know what the timetable is
for getting the money, and then babysit that process till it happens.
Institutional investors have people in charge of wiring money, but you may have
to hunt angels down in person to collect a check.

Inexperienced investors are the ones most likely to get buyer's remorse.
Established ones have learned to treat saying yes as like diving off a diving
board, and they also have more brand to preserve. But I've heard of cases of
even top-tier VC firms welching on deals.

Avoid investors who don't "lead."

Since getting the first offer is most of the difficulty of fundraising, that
should be part of your calculation of expected value when you start. You have
to estimate not just the probability that an investor will say yes, but the
probability that they'd be the first to say yes, and the latter is not simply a
constant fraction of the former. Some investors are known for deciding quickly,
and those are extra valuable early on.

Conversely, an investor who will only invest once other investors have is
worthless initially. And while most investors are influenced by how interested
other investors are in you, there are some who have an explicit policy of only
investing after other investors have. You can recognize this contemptible
subspecies of investor because they often talk about "leads." They say that
they don't lead, or that they'll invest once you have a lead. Sometimes they
even claim to be willing to lead themselves, by which they mean they won't
invest till you get $x from other investors. (It's great if by "lead" they mean
they'll invest unilaterally, and in addition will help you raise more. What's
lame is when they use the term to mean they won't invest unless you can raise
more elsewhere.) [17]

Where does this term "lead" come from? Up till a few years ago, startups
raising money in phase 2 would usually raise equity rounds in which several
investors invested at the same time using the same paperwork. You'd negotiate
the terms with one "lead" investor, and then all the others would sign the same
documents and all the money change hands at the closing.

Series A rounds still work that way, but things now work differently for most
fundraising prior to the series A. Now there are rarely actual rounds before
the A round, or leads for them. Now startups simply raise money from investors
one at a time till they feel they have enough.

Since there are no longer leads, why do investors use that term? Because it's a
more legitimate-sounding way of saying what they really mean. All they really
mean is that their interest in you is a function of other investors' interest
in you. I.e. the spectral signature of all mediocre investors. But when phrased
in terms of leads, it sounds like there is something structural and therefore
legitimate about their behavior.

When an investor tells you "I want to invest in you, but I don't lead,"
translate that in your mind to "No, except yes if you turn out to be a hot
deal." And since that's the default opinion of any investor about any startup,
they've essentially just told you nothing.

When you first start fundraising, the expected value of an investor who won't
"lead" is zero, so talk to such investors last if at all.

Have multiple plans.

Many investors will ask how much you're planning to raise. This question makes
founders feel they should be planning to raise a specific amount. But in fact
you shouldn't. It's a mistake to have fixed plans in an undertaking as
unpredictable as fundraising.

So why do investors ask how much you plan to raise? For much the same reasons a
salesperson in a store will ask "How much were you planning to spend?" if you
walk in looking for a gift for a friend. You probably didn't have a precise
amount in mind; you just want to find something good, and if it's inexpensive,
so much the better. The salesperson asks you this not because you're supposed
to have a plan to spend a specific amount, but so they can show you only things
that cost the most you'll pay.

Similarly, when investors ask how much you plan to raise, it's not because
you're supposed to have a plan. It's to see whether you'd be a suitable
recipient for the size of investment they like to make, and also to judge your
ambition, reasonableness, and how far you are along with fundraising.

If you're a wizard at fundraising, you can say "We plan to raise a $7 million
series A round, and we'll be accepting termsheets next tuesday." I've known a
handful of founders who could pull that off without having VCs laugh in their
faces. But if you're in the inexperienced but earnest majority, the solution is
analogous to the solution I recommend for pitching your startup: do the right
thing and then just tell investors what you're doing.

And the right strategy, in fundraising, is to have multiple plans depending on
how much you can raise. Ideally you should be able to tell investors something
like: we can make it to profitability without raising any more money, but if we
raise a few hundred thousand we can hire one or two smart friends, and if we
raise a couple million, we can hire a whole engineering team, etc.

Different plans match different investors. If you're talking to a VC firm that
only does series A rounds (though there are few of those left), it would be a
waste of time talking about any but your most expensive plan. Whereas if you're
talking to an angel who invests $20k at a time and you haven't raised any money
yet, you probably want to focus on your least expensive plan.

If you're so fortunate as to have to think about the upper limit on what you
should raise, a good rule of thumb is to multiply the number of people you want
to hire times $15k times 18 months. In most startups, nearly all the costs are
a function of the number of people, and $15k per month is the conventional
total cost (including benefits and even office space) per person. $15k per
month is high, so don't actually spend that much. But it's ok to use a high
estimate when fundraising to add a margin for error. If you have additional
expenses, like manufacturing, add in those at the end. Assuming you have none
and you think you might hire 20 people, the most you'd want to raise is 20 x
$15k x 18 = $5.4 million. [18]

Underestimate how much you want.

Though you can focus on different plans when talking to different types of
investors, you should on the whole err on the side of underestimating the
amount you hope to raise.

For example, if you'd like to raise $500k, it's better to say initially that
you're trying to raise $250k. Then when you reach $150k you're more than half
done. That sends two useful signals to investors: that you're doing well, and
that they have to decide quickly because you're running out of room. Whereas if
you'd said you were raising $500k, you'd be less than a third done at $150k. If
fundraising stalled there for an appreciable time, you'd start to read as a
failure.

Saying initially that you're raising $250k doesn't limit you to raising that
much. When you reach your initial target and you still have investor interest,
you can just decide to raise more. Startups do that all the time. In fact, most
startups that are very successful at fundraising end up raising more than they
originally intended.

I'm not saying you should lie, but that you should lower your expectations
initially. There is almost no downside in starting with a low number. It not
only won't cap the amount you raise, but will on the whole tend to increase it.

A good metaphor here is angle of attack. If you try to fly at too steep an
angle of attack, you just stall. If you say right out of the gate that you want
to raise a $5 million series A round, unless you're in a very strong position,
you not only won't get that but won't get anything. Better to start at a low
angle of attack, build up speed, and then gradually increase the angle if you
want.

Be profitable if you can.

You will be in a much stronger position if your collection of plans includes
one for raising zero dollars — i.e. if you can make it to profitability without
raising any additional money. Ideally you want to be able to say to investors
"We'll succeed no matter what, but raising money will help us do it faster."

There are many analogies between fundraising and dating, and this is one of the
strongest. No one wants you if you seem desperate. And the best way not to seem
desperate is not to be desperate. That's one reason we urge startups during YC
to keep expenses low and to try to make it to ramen profitability before Demo
Day. Though it sounds slightly paradoxical, if you want to raise money, the
best thing you can do is get yourself to the point where you don't need to.

There are almost two distinct modes of fundraising: one in which founders who
need money knock on doors seeking it, knowing that otherwise the company will
die or at the very least people will have to be fired, and one in which
founders who don't need money take some to grow faster than they could merely
on their own revenues. To emphasize the distinction I'm going to name them:
type A fundraising is when you don't need money, and type B fundraising is when
you do.

Inexperienced founders read about famous startups doing what was type A
fundraising, and decide they should raise money too, since that seems to be how
startups work. Except when they raise money they don't have a clear path to
profitability and are thus doing type B fundraising. And they are then
surprised how difficult and unpleasant it is.

Of course not all startups can make it to ramen profitability in a few months.
And some that don't still manage to have the upper hand over investors, if they
have some other advantage like extraordinary growth numbers or exceptionally
formidable founders. But as time passes it gets increasingly difficult to
fundraise from a position of strength without being profitable. [19]

Don't optimize for valuation.

When you raise money, what should your valuation be? The most important thing
to understand about valuation is that it's not that important.

Founders who raise money at high valuations tend to be unduly proud of it.
Founders are often competitive people, and since valuation is usually the only
visible number attached to a startup, they end up competing to raise money at
the highest valuation. This is stupid, because fundraising is not the test that
matters. The real test is revenue. Fundraising is just a means to that end.
Being proud of how well you did at fundraising is like being proud of your
college grades.

Not only is fundraising not the test that matters, valuation is not even the
thing to optimize about fundraising. The number one thing you want from phase 2
fundraising is to get the money you need, so you can get back to focusing on
the real test, the success of your company. Number two is good investors.
Valuation is at best third.

The empirical evidence shows just how unimportant it is. Dropbox and Airbnb are
the most successful companies we've funded so far, and they raised money after
Y Combinator at premoney valuations of $4 million and $2.6 million
respectively. Prices are so much higher now that if you can raise money at all
you'll probably raise it at higher valuations than Dropbox and Airbnb. So let
that satisfy your competitiveness. You're doing better than Dropbox and Airbnb!
At a test that doesn't matter.

When you start fundraising, your initial valuation (or valuation cap) will be
set by the deal you make with the first investor who commits. You can increase
the price for later investors, if you get a lot of interest, but by default the
valuation you got from the first investor becomes your asking price.

So if you're raising money from multiple investors, as most companies do in
phase 2, you have to be careful to avoid raising the first from an over-eager
investor at a price you won't be able to sustain. You can of course lower your
price if you need to (in which case you should give the same terms to investors
who invested earlier at a higher price), but you may lose a bunch of leads in
the process of realizing you need to do this.

What you can do if you have eager first investors is raise money from them on
an uncapped convertible note with an MFN clause. This is essentially a way of
saying that the valuation cap of the note will be determined by the next
investors you raise money from.

It will be easier to raise money at a lower valuation. It shouldn't be, but it
is. Since phase 2 prices vary at most 10x and the big successes generate
returns of at least 100x, investors should pick startups entirely based on
their estimate of the probability that the company will be a big success and
hardly at all on price. But although it's a mistake for investors to care about
price, a significant number do. A startup that investors seem to like but won't
invest in at a cap of $x will have an easier time at $x/2. [20]

Yes/no before valuation.

Some investors want to know what your valuation is before they even talk to you
about investing. If your valuation has already been set by a prior investment
at a specific valuation or cap, you can tell them that number. But if it isn't
set because you haven't closed anyone yet, and they try to push you to name a
price, resist doing so. If this would be the first investor you've closed, then
this could be the tipping point of fundraising. That means closing this
investor is the first priority, and you need to get the conversation onto that
instead of being dragged sideways into a discussion of price.

Fortunately there is a way to avoid naming a price in this situation. And it is
not just a negotiating trick; it's how you (both) should be operating. Tell
them that valuation is not the most important thing to you and that you haven't
thought much about it, that you are looking for investors you want to partner
with and who want to partner with you, and that you should talk first about
whether they want to invest at all. Then if they decide they do want to invest,
you can figure out a price. But first things first.

Since valuation isn't that important and getting fundraising rolling is, we
usually tell founders to give the first investor who commits as low a price as
they need to. This is a safe technique so long as you combine it with the next
one. [21]

Beware "valuation sensitive" investors.

Occasionally you'll encounter investors who describe themselves as "valuation
sensitive." What this means in practice is that they are compulsive negotiators
who will suck up a lot of your time trying to push your price down. You should
therefore never approach such investors first. While you shouldn't chase high
valuations, you also don't want your valuation to be set artificially low
because the first investor who committed happened to be a compulsive
negotiator. Some such investors have value, but the time to approach them is
near the end of fundraising, when you're in a position to say "this is the
price everyone else has paid; take it or leave it" and not mind if they leave
it. This way, you'll not only get market price, but it will also take less
time.

Ideally you know which investors have a reputation for being "valuation
sensitive" and can postpone dealing with them till last, but occasionally one
you didn't know about will pop up early on. The rule of doing breadth first
search weighted by expected value already tells you what to do in this case:
slow down your interactions with them.

There are a handful of investors who will try to invest at a lower valuation
even when your price has already been set. Lowering your price is a backup plan
you resort to when you discover you've let the price get set too high to close
all the money you need. So you'd only want to talk to this sort of investor if
you were about to do that anyway. But since investor meetings have to be
arranged at least a few days in advance and you can't predict when you'll need
to resort to lowering your price, this means in practice that you should
approach this type of investor last if at all.

If you're surprised by a lowball offer, treat it as a backup offer and delay
responding to it. When someone makes an offer in good faith, you have a moral
obligation to respond in a reasonable time. But lowballing you is a dick move
that should be met with the corresponding countermove.

Accept offers greedily.

I'm a little leery of using the term "greedily" when writing about fundraising
lest non-programmers misunderstand me, but a greedy algorithm is simply one
that doesn't try to look into the future. A greedy algorithm takes the best of
the options in front of it right now. And that is how startups should approach
fundraising in phases 2 and later. Don't try to look into the future because
(a) the future is unpredictable, and indeed in this business you're often being
deliberately misled about it and (b) your first priority in fundraising should
be to get it finished and get back to work anyway.

If someone makes you an acceptable offer, take it. If you have multiple
incompatible offers, take the best. Don't reject an acceptable offer in the
hope of getting a better one in the future.

These simple rules cover a wide variety of cases. If you're raising money from
many investors, roll them up as they say yes. As you start to feel you've
raised enough, the threshold for acceptable will start to get higher.

In practice offers exist for stretches of time, not points. So when you get an
acceptable offer that would be incompatible with others (e.g. an offer to
invest most of the money you need), you can tell the other investors you're
talking to that you have an offer good enough to accept, and give them a few
days to make their own. This could lose you some that might have made an offer
if they had more time. But by definition you don't care; the initial offer was
acceptable.

Some investors will try to prevent others from having time to decide by giving
you an "exploding" offer, meaning one that's only valid for a few days. Offers
from the very best investors explode less frequently and less rapidly — Fred
Wilson never gives exploding offers, for example — because they're confident
you'll pick them. But lower-tier investors sometimes give offers with very
short fuses, because they believe no one who had other options would choose
them. A deadline of three working days is acceptable. You shouldn't need more
than that if you've been talking to investors in parallel. But a deadline any
shorter is a sign you're dealing with a sketchy investor. You can usually call
their bluff, and you may need to. [22]

It might seem that instead of accepting offers greedily, your goal should be to
get the best investors as partners. That is certainly a good goal, but in phase
2 "get the best investors" only rarely conflicts with "accept offers greedily,"
because the best investors don't usually take any longer to decide than the
others. The only case where the two strategies give conflicting advice is when
you have to forgo an offer from an acceptable investor to see if you'll get an
offer from a better one. If you talk to investors in parallel and push back on
exploding offers with excessively short deadlines, that will almost never
happen. But if it does, "get the best investors" is in the average case bad
advice. The best investors are also the most selective, because they get their
pick of all the startups. They reject nearly everyone they talk to, which means
in the average case it's a bad trade to exchange a definite offer from an
acceptable investor for a potential offer from a better one.

(The situation is different in phase 1. You can't apply to all the incubators
in parallel, because some offset their schedules to prevent this. In phase 1,
"accept offers greedily" and "get the best investors" do conflict, so if you
want to apply to multiple incubators, you should do it in such a way that the
ones you want most decide first.)

Sometimes when you're raising money from multiple investors, a series A will
emerge out of those conversations, and these rules even cover what to do in
that case. When an investor starts to talk to you about a series A, keep taking
smaller investments till they actually give you a termsheet. There's no
practical difficulty. If the smaller investments are on convertible notes,
they'll just convert into the series A round. The series A investor won't like
having all these other random investors as bedfellows, but if it bothers them
so much they should get on with giving you a termsheet. Till they do, you don't
know for sure they will, and the greedy algorithm tells you what to do. [23]

Don't sell more than 25% in phase 2.

If you do well, you will probably raise a series A round eventually. I say
probably because things are changing with series A rounds. Startups may start
to skip them. But only one company we've funded has so far, so tentatively
assume the path to huge passes through an A round. [24]

Which means you should avoid doing things in earlier rounds that will mess up
raising an A round. For example, if you've sold more than about 40% of your
company total, it starts to get harder to raise an A round, because VCs worry
there will not be enough stock left to keep the founders motivated.

Our rule of thumb is not to sell more than 25% in phase 2, on top of whatever
you sold in phase 1, which should be less than 15%. If you're raising money on
uncapped notes, you'll have to guess what the eventual equity round valuation
might be. Guess conservatively.

(Since the goal of this rule is to avoid messing up the series A, there's
obviously an exception if you end up raising a series A in phase 2, as a
handful of startups do.)

Have one person handle fundraising.

If you have multiple founders, pick one to handle fundraising so the other(s)
can keep working on the company. And since the danger of fundraising is not the
time taken up by the actual meetings but that it becomes the top idea in your
mind, the founder who handles fundraising should make a conscious effort to
insulate the other founder(s) from the details of the process. [25]

(If the founders mistrust one another, this could cause some friction. But if
the founders mistrust one another, you have worse problems to worry about than
how to organize fundraising.)

The founder who handles fundraising should be the CEO, who should in turn be
the most formidable of the founders. Even if the CEO is a programmer and
another founder is a salesperson? Yes. If you happen to be that type of
founding team, you're effectively a single founder when it comes to
fundraising.

It's ok to bring all the founders to meet an investor who will invest a lot,
and who needs this meeting as the final step before deciding. But wait till
that point. Introducing an investor to your cofounder(s) should be like
introducing a girl/boyfriend to your parents — something you do only when
things reach a certain stage of seriousness.

Even if there are still one or more founders focusing on the company during
fundraising, growth will slow. But try to get as much growth as you can,
because fundraising is a segment of time, not a point, and what happens to the
company during that time affects the outcome. If your numbers grow
significantly between two investor meetings, investors will be hot to close,
and if your numbers are flat or down they'll start to get cold feet.

You'll need an executive summary and (maybe) a deck.

Traditionally phase 2 fundraising consists of presenting a slide deck in person
to investors. Sequoia describes what such a deck should contain, and since
they're the customer you can take their word for it.

I say "traditionally" because I'm ambivalent about decks, and (though perhaps
this is wishful thinking) they seem to be on the way out. A lot of the most
successful startups we fund never make decks in phase 2. They just talk to
investors and explain what they plan to do. Fundraising usually takes off fast
for the startups that are most successful at it, and they're thus able to
excuse themselves by saying that they haven't had time to make a deck.

You'll also want an executive summary, which should be no more than a page long
and describe in the most matter of fact language what you plan to do, why it's
a good idea, and what progress you've made so far. The point of the summary is
to remind the investor (who may have met many startups that day) what you
talked about.

Assume that if you give someone a copy of your deck or executive summary, it
will be passed on to whoever you'd least like to have it. But don't refuse on
that account to give copies to investors you meet. You just have to treat such
leaks as a cost of doing business. In practice it's not that high a cost.
Though founders are rightly indignant when their plans get leaked to
competitors, I can't think of a startup whose outcome has been affected by it.

Sometimes an investor will ask you to send them your deck and/or executive
summary before they decide whether to meet with you. I wouldn't do that. It's a
sign they're not really interested.

Stop fundraising when it stops working.

When do you stop fundraising? Ideally when you've raised enough. But what if
you haven't raised as much as you'd like? When do you give up?

It's hard to give general advice about this, because there have been cases of
startups that kept trying to raise money even when it seemed hopeless, and
miraculously succeeded. But what I usually tell founders is to stop fundraising
when you start to get a lot of air in the straw. When you're drinking through a
straw, you can tell when you get to the end of the liquid because you start to
get a lot of air in the straw. When your fundraising options run out, they
usually run out in the same way. Don't keep sucking on the straw if you're just
getting air. It's not going to get better.

Don't get addicted to fundraising.

Fundraising is a chore for most founders, but some find it more interesting
than working on their startup. The work at an early stage startup often
consists of unglamorous schleps. Whereas fundraising, when it's going well, can
be quite the opposite. Instead of sitting in your grubby apartment listening to
users complain about bugs in your software, you're being offered millions of
dollars by famous investors over lunch at a nice restaurant. [26]

The danger of fundraising is particularly acute for people who are good at it.
It's always fun to work on something you're good at. If you're one of these
people, beware. Fundraising is not what will make your company successful.
Listening to users complain about bugs in your software is what will make you
successful. And the big danger of getting addicted to fundraising is not merely
that you'll spend too long on it or raise too much money. It's that you'll
start to think of yourself as being already successful, and lose your taste for
the schleps you need to undertake to actually be successful. Startups can be
destroyed by this.

When I see a startup with young founders that is fabulously successful at
fundraising, I mentally decrease my estimate of the probability that they'll
succeed. The press may be writing about them as if they'd been anointed as the
next Google, but I'm thinking "this is going to end badly."

Don't raise too much.

Though only a handful of startups have to worry about this, it is possible to
raise too much. The dangers of raising too much are subtle but insidious. One
is that it will set impossibly high expectations. If you raise an excessive
amount of money, it will be at a high valuation, and the danger of raising
money at too high a valuation is that you won't be able to increase it
sufficiently the next time you raise money.

A company's valuation is expected to rise each time it raises money. If not
it's a sign of a company in trouble, which makes you unattractive to investors.
So if you raise money in phase 2 at a post-money valuation of $30 million, the
pre-money valuation of your next round, if you want to raise one, is going to
have to be at least $50 million. And you have to be doing really, really well
to raise money at $50 million.

It's very dangerous to let the competitiveness of your current round set the
performance threshold you have to meet to raise your next one, because the two
are only loosely coupled.

But the money itself may be more dangerous than the valuation. The more you
raise, the more you spend, and spending a lot of money can be disastrous for an
early stage startup. Spending a lot makes it harder to become profitable, and
perhaps even worse, it makes you more rigid, because the main way to spend
money is people, and the more people you have, the harder it is to change
directions. So if you do raise a huge amount of money, don't spend it. (You
will find that advice almost impossible to follow, so hot will be the money
burning a hole in your pocket, but I feel obliged at least to try.)

Be nice.

Startups raising money occasionally alienate investors by seeming arrogant.
Sometimes because they are arrogant, and sometimes because they're noobs
clumsily attempting to mimic the toughness they've observed in experienced
founders.

It's a mistake to behave arrogantly to investors. While there are certain
situations in which certain investors like certain kinds of arrogance,
investors vary greatly in this respect, and a flick of the whip that will bring
one to heel will make another roar with indignation. The only safe strategy is
never to seem arrogant at all.

That will require some diplomacy if you follow the advice I've given here,
because the advice I've given is essentially how to play hardball back. When
you refuse to meet an investor because you're not in fundraising mode, or slow
down your interactions with an investor who moves too slow, or treat a
contingent offer as the no it actually is and then, by accepting offers
greedily, end up leaving that investor out, you're going to be doing things
investors don't like. So you must cushion the blow with soft words. At YC we
tell startups they can blame us. And now that I've written this, everyone else
can blame me if they want. That plus the inexperience card should work in most
situations: sorry, we think you're great, but PG said startups shouldn't ___,
and since we're new to fundraising, we feel like we have to play it safe.

The danger of behaving arrogantly is greatest when you're doing well. When
everyone wants you, it's hard not to let it go to your head. Especially if till
recently no one wanted you. But restrain yourself. The startup world is a small
place, and startups have lots of ups and downs. This is a domain where it's
more true than usual that pride goeth before a fall. [27]

Be nice when investors reject you as well. The best investors are not wedded to
their initial opinion of you. If they reject you in phase 2 and you end up
doing well, they'll often invest in phase 3. In fact investors who reject you
are some of your warmest leads for future fundraising. Any investor who spent
significant time deciding probably came close to saying yes. Often you have
some internal champion who only needs a little more evidence to convince the
skeptics. So it's wise not merely to be nice to investors who reject you, but
(unless they behaved badly) to treat it as the beginning of a relationship.

The bar will be higher next time.

Assume the money you raise in phase 2 will be the last you ever raise. You must
make it to profitability on this money if you can.

Over the past several years, the investment community has evolved from a
strategy of anointing a small number of winners early and then supporting them
for years to a strategy of spraying money at early stage startups and then
ruthlessly culling them at the next stage. This is probably the optimal
strategy for investors. It's too hard to pick winners early on. Better to let
the market do it for you. But it often comes as a surprise to startups how much
harder it is to raise money in phase 3.

When your company is only a couple months old, all it has to be is a promising
experiment that's worth funding to see how it turns out. The next time you
raise money, the experiment has to have worked. You have to be on a trajectory
that leads to going public. And while there are some ideas where the proof that
the experiment worked might consist of e.g. query response times, usually the
proof is profitability. Usually phase 3 fundraising has to be type A
fundraising.

In practice there are two ways startups hose themselves between phases 2 and 3.
Some are just too slow to become profitable. They raise enough money to last
for two years. There doesn't seem any particular urgency to be profitable. So
they don't make any effort to make money for a year. But by that time, not
making money has become habitual. When they finally decide to try, they find
they can't.

The other way companies hose themselves is by letting their expenses grow too
fast. Which almost always means hiring too many people. You usually shouldn't
go out and hire 8 people as soon as you raise money at phase 2. Usually you
want to wait till you have growth (and thus usually revenues) to justify them.
A lot of VCs will encourage you to hire aggressively. VCs generally tell you to
spend too much, partly because as money people they err on the side of solving
problems by spending money, and partly because they want you to sell them more
of your company in subsequent rounds. Don't listen to them.

Don't make things complicated.

I realize it may seem odd to sum up this huge treatise by saying that my
overall advice is not to make fundraising too complicated, but if you go back
and look at this list you'll see it's basically a simple recipe with a lot of
implications and edge cases. Avoid investors till you decide to raise money,
and then when you do, talk to them all in parallel, prioritized by expected
value, and accept offers greedily. That's fundraising in one sentence. Don't
introduce complicated optimizations, and don't let investors introduce
complications either.

Fundraising is not what will make you successful. It's just a means to an end.
Your primary goal should be to get it over with and get back to what will make
you successful — making things and talking to users — and the path I've
described will for most startups be the surest way to that destination.

Be good, take care of yourselves, and don't leave the path.





Notes

[1] The worst explosions happen when unpromising-seeming startups encounter
mediocre investors. Good investors don't lead startups on; their reputations
are too valuable. And startups that seem promising can usually get enough money
from good investors that they don't have to talk to mediocre ones. It is the
unpromising-seeming startups that have to resort to raising money from mediocre
investors. And it's particularly damaging when these investors flake, because
unpromising-seeming startups are usually more desperate for money.

(Not all unpromising-seeming startups do badly. Some are merely ugly ducklings
in the sense that they violate current startup fashions.)

[2] One YC founder told me:

    I think in general we've done ok at fundraising, but I managed to screw up
    twice at the exact same thing — trying to focus on building the company and
    fundraising at the same time. 

[3] There is one subtle danger you have to watch out for here, which I warn
about later: beware of getting too high a valuation from an eager investor,
lest that set an impossibly high target when raising additional money.

[4] If they really need a meeting, then they're not ready to invest, regardless
of what they say. They're still deciding, which means you're being asked to
come in and convince them. Which is fundraising.

[5] Associates at VC firms regularly cold email startups. Naive founders think
"Wow, a VC is interested in us!" But an associate is not a VC. They have no
decision-making power. And while they may introduce startups they like to
partners at their firm, the partners discriminate against deals that come to
them this way. I don't know of a single VC investment that began with an
associate cold-emailing a startup. If you want to approach a specific firm, get
an intro to a partner from someone they respect.

It's ok to talk to an associate if you get an intro to a VC firm or they see
you at a Demo Day and they begin by having an associate vet you. That's not a
promising lead and should therefore get low priority, but it's not as
completely worthless as a cold email.

Because the title "associate" has gotten a bad reputation, a few VC firms have
started to give their associates the title "partner," which can make things
very confusing. If you're a YC startup you can ask us who's who; otherwise you
may have to do some research online. There may be a special title for actual
partners. If someone speaks for the firm in the press or a blog on the firm's
site, they're probably a real partner. If they're on boards of directors
they're probably a real partner.

There are titles between "associate" and "partner," including "principal" and
"venture partner." The meanings of these titles vary too much to generalize.

[6] For similar reasons, avoid casual conversations with potential acquirers.
They can lead to distractions even more dangerous than fundraising. Don't even
take a meeting with a potential acquirer unless you want to sell your company
right now.

[7] Joshua Reeves specifically suggests asking each investor to intro you to
two more investors.

Don't ask investors who say no for introductions to other investors. That will
in many cases be an anti-recommendation.

[8] This is not always as deliberate as its sounds. A lot of the delays and
disconnects between founders and investors are induced by the customs of the
venture business, which have evolved the way they have because they suit
investors' interests.

[9] One YC founder who read a draft of this essay wrote:

    This is the most important section. I think it might bear stating even more
    clearly. "Investors will deliberately affect more interest than they have
    to preserve optionality. If an investor seems very interested in you, they
    still probably won't invest. The solution for this is to assume the worst —
    that an investor is just feigning interest — until you get a definite
    commitment." 

[10] Though you should probably pack investor meetings as closely as you can,
Jeff Byun mentions one reason not to: if you pack investor meetings too
closely, you'll have less time for your pitch to evolve.

Some founders deliberately schedule a handful of lame investors first, to get
the bugs out of their pitch.

[11] There is not an efficient market in this respect. Some of the most useless
investors are also the highest maintenance.

[12] Incidentally, this paragraph is sales 101. If you want to see it in
action, go talk to a car dealer.

[13] I know one very smooth founder who used to end investor meetings with "So,
can I count you in?" delivered as if it were "Can you pass the salt?" Unless
you're very smooth (if you're not sure...), do not do this yourself. There is
nothing more unconvincing, for an investor, than a nerdy founder trying to
deliver the lines meant for a smooth one.

Investors are fine with funding nerds. So if you're a nerd, just try to be a
good nerd, rather than doing a bad imitation of a smooth salesman.

[14] Ian Hogarth suggests a good way to tell how serious potential investors
are: the resources they expend on you after the first meeting. An investor
who's seriously interested will already be working to help you even before
they've committed.

[15] In principle you might have to think about so-called "signalling risk." If
a prestigious VC makes a small seed investment in you, what if they don't want
to invest the next time you raise money? Other investors might assume that the
VC knows you well, since they're an existing investor, and if they don't want
to invest in your next round, that must mean you suck. The reason I say "in
principle" is that in practice signalling hasn't been much of a problem so far.
It rarely arises, and in the few cases where it does, the startup in question
usually is doing badly and is doomed anyway.

If you have the luxury of choosing among seed investors, you can play it safe
by excluding VC firms. But it isn't critical to.

[16] Sometimes a competitor will deliberately threaten you with a lawsuit just
as you start fundraising, because they know you'll have to disclose the threat
to potential investors and they hope this will make it harder for you to raise
money. If this happens it will probably frighten you more than investors.
Experienced investors know about this trick, and know the actual lawsuits
rarely happen. So if you're attacked in this way, be forthright with investors.
They'll be more alarmed if you seem evasive than if you tell them everything.

[17] A related trick is to claim that they'll only invest contingently on other
investors doing so because otherwise you'd be "undercapitalized." This is
almost always bullshit. They can't estimate your minimum capital needs that
precisely.

[18] You won't hire all those 20 people at once, and you'll probably have some
revenues before 18 months are out. But those too are acceptable or at least
accepted additions to the margin for error.

[19] Type A fundraising is so much better that it might even be worth doing
something different if it gets you there sooner. One YC founder told me that if
he were a first-time founder again he'd "leave ideas that are up-front capital
intensive to founders with established reputations."

[20] I don't know whether this happens because they're innumerate, or because
they believe they have zero ability to predict startup outcomes (in which case
this behavior at least wouldn't be irrational). In either case the implications
are similar.

[21] If you're a YC startup and you have an investor who for some reason
insists that you decide the price, any YC partner can estimate a market price
for you.

[22] You should respond in kind when investors behave upstandingly too. When an
investor makes you a clean offer with no deadline, you have a moral obligation
to respond promptly.

[23] Tell the investors talking to you about an A round about the smaller
investments you raise as you raise them. You owe them such updates on your cap
table, and this is also a good way to pressure them to act. They won't like you
raising other money and may pressure you to stop, but they can't legitimately
ask you to commit to them till they also commit to you. If they want you to
stop raising money, the way to do it is to give you a series A termsheet with a
no-shop clause.

You can relent a little if the potential series A investor has a great
reputation and they're clearly working fast to get you a termsheet,
particularly if a third party like YC is involved to ensure there are no
misunderstandings. But be careful.

[24] The company is Weebly, which made it to profitability on a seed investment
of $650k. They did try to raise a series A in the fall of 2008 but (no doubt
partly because it was the fall of 2008) the terms they were offered were so bad
that they decided to skip raising an A round.

[25] Another advantage of having one founder take fundraising meetings is that
you never have to negotiate in real time, which is something inexperienced
founders should avoid. One YC founder told me:

    Investors are professional negotiators and can negotiate on the spot very
    easily. If only one founder is in the room, you can say "I need to circle
    back with my co-founder" before making any commitments. I used to do this
    all the time. 

[26] You'll be lucky if fundraising feels pleasant enough to become addictive.
More often you have to worry about the other extreme — becoming demoralized
when investors reject you. As one (very successful) YC founder wrote after
reading a draft of this:

    It's hard to mentally deal with the sheer scale of rejection in fundraising
    and if you are not in the right mindset you will fail. Users may love you
    but these supposedly smart investors may not understand you at all. At this
    point for me, rejection still rankles but I've come to accept that
    investors are just not super thoughtful for the most part and you need to
    play the game according to certain somewhat depressing rules (many of which
    you are listing) in order to win. 

[27] The actual sentence in the King James Bible is "Pride goeth before
destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall."

Thanks to Slava Akhmechet, Sam Altman, Nate Blecharczyk, Adora Cheung, Bill
Clerico, John Collison, Patrick Collison, Parker Conrad, Ron Conway, Travis
Deyle, Jason Freedman, Joe Gebbia, Mattan Griffel, Kevin Hale, Jacob Heller,
Ian Hogarth, Justin Kan, Professor Moriarty, Nikhil Nirmel, David Petersen,
Geoff Ralston, Joshua Reeves, Yuri Sagalov, Emmett Shear, Rajat Suri, Garry
Tan, and Nick Tomarello for reading drafts of this.

Y Combinator has now funded 564 startups including the current batch, which has
53. The total valuation of the 287 that have valuations (either by raising an
equity round, getting acquired, or dying) is about $11.7 billion, and the 511
prior to the current batch have collectively raised about $1.7 billion. [1]

As usual those numbers are dominated by a few big winners. The top 10 startups
account for 8.6 of that 11.7 billion. But there is a peloton of younger
startups behind them. There are about 40 more that have a shot at being really
big.

Things got a little out of hand last summer when we had 84 companies in the
batch, so we tightened up our filter to decrease the batch size. [2] Several
journalists have tried to interpret that as evidence for some macro story they
were telling, but the reason had nothing to do with any external trend. The
reason was that we discovered we were using an n² algorithm, and we needed to
buy time to fix it. Fortunately we've come up with several techniques for
sharding YC, and the problem now seems to be fixed. With a new more scaleable
model and only 53 companies, the current batch feels like a walk in the park.
I'd guess we can grow another 2 or 3x before hitting the next bottleneck. [3]

One consequence of funding such a large number of startups is that we see
trends early. And since fundraising is one of the main things we help startups
with, we're in a good position to notice trends in investing.

I'm going to take a shot at describing where these trends are leading. Let's
start with the most basic question: will the future be better or worse than the
past? Will investors, in the aggregate, make more money or less?

I think more. There are multiple forces at work, some of which will decrease
returns, and some of which will increase them. I can't predict for sure which
forces will prevail, but I'll describe them and you can decide for yourself.

There are two big forces driving change in startup funding: it's becoming
cheaper to start a startup, and startups are becoming a more normal thing to
do.

When I graduated from college in 1986, there were essentially two options: get
a job or go to grad school. Now there's a third: start your own company. That's
a big change. In principle it was possible to start your own company in 1986
too, but it didn't seem like a real possibility. It seemed possible to start a
consulting company, or a niche product company, but it didn't seem possible to
start a company that would become big. [4]

That kind of change, from 2 paths to 3, is the sort of big social shift that
only happens once every few generations. I think we're still at the beginning
of this one. It's hard to predict how big a deal it will be. As big a deal as
the Industrial Revolution? Maybe. Probably not. But it will be a big enough
deal that it takes almost everyone by surprise, because those big social shifts
always do.

One thing we can say for sure is that there will be a lot more startups. The
monolithic, hierarchical companies of the mid 20th century are being replaced
by networks of smaller companies. This process is not just something happening
now in Silicon Valley. It started decades ago, and it's happening as far afield
as the car industry. It has a long way to run. [5]

The other big driver of change is that startups are becoming cheaper to start.
And in fact the two forces are related: the decreasing cost of starting a
startup is one of the reasons startups are becoming a more normal thing to do.

The fact that startups need less money means founders will increasingly have
the upper hand over investors. You still need just as much of their energy and
imagination, but they don't need as much of your money. Because founders have
the upper hand, they'll retain an increasingly large share of the stock in, and
control of, their companies. Which means investors will get less stock and less
control.

Does that mean investors will make less money? Not necessarily, because there
will be more good startups. The total amount of desirable startup stock
available to investors will probably increase, because the number of desirable
startups will probably grow faster than the percentage they sell to investors
shrinks.

There's a rule of thumb in the VC business that there are about 15 companies a
year that will be really successful. Although a lot of investors unconsciously
treat this number as if it were some sort of cosmological constant, I'm certain
it isn't. There are probably limits on the rate at which technology can
develop, but that's not the limiting factor now. If it were, each successful
startup would be founded the month it became possible, and that is not the
case. Right now the limiting factor on the number of big hits is the number of
sufficiently good founders starting companies, and that number can and will
increase. There are still a lot of people who'd make great founders who never
end up starting a company. You can see that from how randomly some of the most
successful startups got started. So many of the biggest startups almost didn't
happen that there must be a lot of equally good startups that actually didn't
happen.

There might be 10x or even 50x more good founders out there. As more of them go
ahead and start startups, those 15 big hits a year could easily become 50 or
even 100. [6]

What about returns, though? Are we heading for a world in which returns will be
pinched by increasingly high valuations? I think the top firms will actually
make more money than they have in the past. High returns don't come from
investing at low valuations. They come from investing in the companies that do
really well. So if there are more of those to be had each year, the best
pickers should have more hits.

This means there should be more variability in the VC business. The firms that
can recognize and attract the best startups will do even better, because there
will be more of them to recognize and attract. Whereas the bad firms will get
the leftovers, as they do now, and yet pay a higher price for them.

Nor do I think it will be a problem that founders keep control of their
companies for longer. The empirical evidence on that is already clear:
investors make more money as founders' bitches than their bosses. Though
somewhat humiliating, this is actually good news for investors, because it
takes less time to serve founders than to micromanage them.

What about angels? I think there is a lot of opportunity there. It used to suck
to be an angel investor. You couldn't get access to the best deals, unless you
got lucky like Andy Bechtolsheim, and when you did invest in a startup, VCs
might try to strip you of your stock when they arrived later. Now an angel can
go to something like Demo Day or AngelList and have access to the same deals
VCs do. And the days when VCs could wash angels out of the cap table are long
gone.

I think one of the biggest unexploited opportunities in startup investing right
now is angel-sized investments made quickly. Few investors understand the cost
that raising money from them imposes on startups. When the company consists
only of the founders, everything grinds to a halt during fundraising, which can
easily take 6 weeks. The current high cost of fundraising means there is room
for low-cost investors to undercut the rest. And in this context, low-cost
means deciding quickly. If there were a reputable investor who invested $100k
on good terms and promised to decide yes or no within 24 hours, they'd get
access to almost all the best deals, because every good startup would approach
them first. It would be up to them to pick, because every bad startup would
approach them first too, but at least they'd see everything. Whereas if an
investor is notorious for taking a long time to make up their mind or
negotiating a lot about valuation, founders will save them for last. And in the
case of the most promising startups, which tend to have an easy time raising
money, last can easily become never.

Will the number of big hits grow linearly with the total number of new
startups? Probably not, for two reasons. One is that the scariness of starting
a startup in the old days was a pretty effective filter. Now that the cost of
failing is becoming lower, we should expect founders to do it more. That's not
a bad thing. It's common in technology for an innovation that decreases the
cost of failure to increase the number of failures and yet leave you net ahead.

The other reason the number of big hits won't grow proportionately to the
number of startups is that there will start to be an increasing number of idea
clashes. Although the finiteness of the number of good ideas is not the reason
there are only 15 big hits a year, the number has to be finite, and the more
startups there are, the more we'll see multiple companies doing the same thing
at the same time. It will be interesting, in a bad way, if idea clashes become
a lot more common. [7]

Mostly because of the increasing number of early failures, the startup business
of the future won't simply be the same shape, scaled up. What used to be an
obelisk will become a pyramid. It will be a little wider at the top, but a lot
wider at the bottom.

What does that mean for investors? One thing it means is that there will be
more opportunities for investors at the earliest stage, because that's where
the volume of our imaginary solid is growing fastest. Imagine the obelisk of
investors that corresponds to the obelisk of startups. As it widens out into a
pyramid to match the startup pyramid, all the contents are adhering to the top,
leaving a vacuum at the bottom.

That opportunity for investors mostly means an opportunity for new investors,
because the degree of risk an existing investor or firm is comfortable taking
is one of the hardest things for them to change. Different types of investors
are adapted to different degrees of risk, but each has its specific degree of
risk deeply imprinted on it, not just in the procedures they follow but in the
personalities of the people who work there.

I think the biggest danger for VCs, and also the biggest opportunity, is at the
series A stage. Or rather, what used to be the series A stage before series As
turned into de facto series B rounds.

Right now, VCs often knowingly invest too much money at the series A stage.
They do it because they feel they need to get a big chunk of each series A
company to compensate for the opportunity cost of the board seat it consumes.
Which means when there is a lot of competition for a deal, the number that
moves is the valuation (and thus amount invested) rather than the percentage of
the company being sold. Which means, especially in the case of more promising
startups, that series A investors often make companies take more money than
they want.

Some VCs lie and claim the company really needs that much. Others are more
candid, and admit their financial models require them to own a certain
percentage of each company. But we all know the amounts being raised in series
A rounds are not determined by asking what would be best for the companies.
They're determined by VCs starting from the amount of the company they want to
own, and the market setting the valuation and thus the amount invested.

Like a lot of bad things, this didn't happen intentionally. The VC business
backed into it as their initial assumptions gradually became obsolete. The
traditions and financial models of the VC business were established when
founders needed investors more. In those days it was natural for founders to
sell VCs a big chunk of their company in the series A round. Now founders would
prefer to sell less, and VCs are digging in their heels because they're not
sure if they can make money buying less than 20% of each series A company.

The reason I describe this as a danger is that series A investors are
increasingly at odds with the startups they supposedly serve, and that tends to
come back to bite you eventually. The reason I describe it as an opportunity is
that there is now a lot of potential energy built up, as the market has moved
away from VCs' traditional business model. Which means the first VC to break
ranks and start to do series A rounds for as much equity as founders want to
sell (and with no "option pool" that comes only from the founders' shares)
stands to reap huge benefits.

What will happen to the VC business when that happens? Hell if I know. But I
bet that particular firm will end up ahead. If one top-tier VC firm started to
do series A rounds that started from the amount the company needed to raise and
let the percentage acquired vary with the market, instead of the other way
around, they'd instantly get almost all the best startups. And that's where the
money is.

You can't fight market forces forever. Over the last decade we've seen the
percentage of the company sold in series A rounds creep inexorably downward.
40% used to be common. Now VCs are fighting to hold the line at 20%. But I am
daily waiting for the line to collapse. It's going to happen. You may as well
anticipate it, and look bold.

Who knows, maybe VCs will make more money by doing the right thing. It wouldn't
be the first time that happened. Venture capital is a business where occasional
big successes generate hundredfold returns. How much confidence can you really
have in financial models for something like that anyway? The big successes only
have to get a tiny bit less occasional to compensate for a 2x decrease in the
stock sold in series A rounds.

If you want to find new opportunities for investing, look for things founders
complain about. Founders are your customers, and the things they complain about
are unsatisfied demand. I've given two examples of things founders complain
about most—investors who take too long to make up their minds, and excessive
dilution in series A rounds—so those are good places to look now. But the more
general recipe is: do something founders want.





Notes

[1] I realize revenue and not fundraising is the proper test of success for a
startup. The reason we quote statistics about fundraising is because those are
the numbers we have. We couldn't talk meaningfully about revenues without
including the numbers from the most successful startups, and we don't have
those. We often discuss revenue growth with the earlier stage startups, because
that's how we gauge their progress, but when companies reach a certain size it
gets presumptuous for a seed investor to do that.

In any case, companies' market caps do eventually become a function of
revenues, and post-money valuations of funding rounds are at least guesses by
pros about where those market caps will end up.

The reason only 287 have valuations is that the rest have mostly raised money
on convertible notes, and although convertible notes often have valuation caps,
a valuation cap is merely an upper bound on a valuation.

[2] We didn't try to accept a particular number. We have no way of doing that
even if we wanted to. We just tried to be significantly pickier.

[3] Though you never know with bottlenecks, I'm guessing the next one will be
coordinating efforts among partners.

[4] I realize starting a company doesn't have to mean starting a startup. There
will be lots of people starting normal companies too. But that's not relevant
to an audience of investors.

Geoff Ralston reports that in Silicon Valley it seemed thinkable to start a
startup in the mid 1980s. It would have started there. But I know it didn't to
undergraduates on the East Coast.

[5] This trend is one of the main causes of the increase in economic inequality
in the US since the mid twentieth century. The person who would in 1950 have
been the general manager of the x division of Megacorp is now the founder of
the x company, and owns significant equity in it.

[6] If Congress passes the founder visa in a non-broken form, that alone could
in principle get us up to 20x, since 95% of the world's population lives
outside the US.

[7] If idea clashes got bad enough, it could change what it means to be a
startup. We currently advise startups mostly to ignore competitors. We tell
them startups are competitive like running, not like soccer; you don't have to
go and steal the ball away from the other team. But if idea clashes became
common enough, maybe you'd start to have to. That would be unfortunate.

Thanks to Sam Altman, Paul Buchheit, Dalton Caldwell, Patrick Collison, Jessica
Livingston, Andrew Mason, Geoff Ralston, and Garry Tan for reading drafts of
this.

